Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science Fiction Chronicle is a major science
fiction and fantasy news magazine distributed by Algol Press, which appears
monthly. Its publisher is Andrew Porter, who for most of his life has been a
science fiction fan. Porter told us how he discovered science fiction. It's a
story familiar to most of us. My brother was reading SF first. He's five years
older than I am. So when he was 15 and I was 10, I just started picking it up
from him. And he still reads SF, but obviously I have gone much further, much
deeper into the subject than he would have ever dreamed of. Porter went on to
produce several fan publications, then he started Algol Magazine. Algol was
later named Starship, which is still a viable magazine. Porter founded Algol
Press when his ambitions grew. Science Fiction Chronicle is another one of the
productions of Algol Press. We asked him who else is involved in running Algol
Press. When I started, wanted to start publishing chapbooks and books and stuff
like that, I adopted the name Algol Press from Algol Magazine. But it's not
really a... It's just sort of like the name I press, and if I do chapbooks or
books or something... I mean, I did one book, really. I did the Book of Ellison,
which is a real hardcover and a trade paperback. But people think it's... I work
for this vast Algol Press. And of course, also the appearance of Starship and
Chronicle, like, wow, typeset. And Starship has, or at least had, four-color
covers. Wow, he's got this vast organization behind him. He's not a fan at all,
they say. It's just all me, pasting stuff up in my living room.
After having published several fanzines, Porter started Science Fiction
Chronicle. It was the magazine he had always dreamed of doing. So for years, I
carried on my business card... You have a business card that impresses people
and costs five bucks or five thousand. And I had a thing called SF Chronicle
listed in there, you know, which was just a title. And it was like the newsie I
always wanted to do. Finally, in 1979, I started as a news section in Algol,
which at that time had become Starship by then, changed the title. More hardcore
SF title.
And it started out with, you know, getting subscriptions. So in other words, I
actually started it with several hundred subscriptions. And it was just a thing
done the way I wanted to do it, like typeset and nicely laid out, stuff like
that. Science Fiction Chronicle just had its fourth birthday. It's a rarity for
a science fiction news magazine to have survived for so long. Through the years,
various people have started out news zines. And they've all folded. They've all
gone away. They've all stopped publishing. And people got tired or they got
tired of losing money or something. And it didn't. It's still here. It's doing
pretty well. I mean, it's not... I don't think it's making money yet. But it's
at the break-even point, which is always nice. Advertising is increasing. Now
the recession is ending. Things are starting to take off. Why would a fan devote
his life to producing a news magazine such as Science Fiction Chronicle,
especially since it doesn't net him much profit? Porter told us his reasons.
I've always loved science fiction. I mean, I could probably make a lot more
money publishing a magazine with a lot of naked people in it. Or, you know, or
something, motorcycles or, you know, Hell's Angels official newsletter or
something like that. You know, if you don't buy this newsletter, it will kill
you. One of those things. I don't know. But I just love science fiction. I've
always loved science fiction. And if I can make my living doing something in
science fiction, that's great. Porter also gets a kick out of producing Science
Fiction Chronicle. The kick really is getting up when I feel like it and working
until when I feel like it and not having a boss to yell at me and say, you
screwed up. Or I screwed up and you're going to take the blame because I'm your
boss. We'll have more on our next show with publisher Andrew Porter.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Algol Press is a one-man operation which
publishes the magazine Starship, an occasional book, and the monthly trade
newspaper Science Fiction Chronicle. Andrew Porter of Brooklyn is the one-man
operator. He handles all aspects of the business, from subscriptions to
advertising, from editorializing to arranging the printing. Recently we spoke
with Porter, and we asked him to describe a typical work day. I get up anywhere
from about 10:30 to 11:30,
and putter around, and I'll
do stuff in the morning like entering financial stuff or getting checks ready
for deposit and, say, go into Midtown. And I hit a whole bunch of stuff in one
stop on the subway. There's my commercial bank for my accounts, you know,
Starship and SF Chronicle and stuff. And then two doors away there's my personal
savings bank. Across the street is the New York office of the printer I use. And
I can go in there and use their tie line to co-op the printer out in
Pennsylvania and find out how stuff's doing. Or I can deliver stuff that has to
be, you know, they have a pouch system overnight. There's a stationery store
near there I use, and my post office box is up there in Grand Central Station
and the place where I have pictures developed and all that. And, you know, then
I come back home and I'll do other stuff at night. I like to work late at night,
very quiet. I have a TV going, some background noise. I watch Johnny
Carson, and then David Letterman comes on. And then after that there's a very
good news program called News Overnight on NBC, which is very tongue-in-cheek.
They do a lot, not ready for primetime news and other strange things. And then
if I'm really working straight through, there's two issues, two episodes of Mary
Tyler Moore come on. It's followed by an episode of Bob Newhart. And by that
time, it's four in the morning, and then I love to see a rerun come on. Usually
I can't stand that at all, so I just turn off my feet. Or I'll knock off the
door earlier and then read. The April 1983 issue of Science Fiction Chronicle
had some startling headlines. Cherryh, Spinrad, to Wed, Collaborate. Dahl pays
$50 million for New American Library. The New England Science Fiction
Association acquires Sheraton Boston. These turned out to be fictitious. They
were an April Fool's joke. Porter told us about it. I asked people's permission
to do that. I asked Don Warren's permission to do that story. And I asked
Cherryh's permission, and I asked Spinrad's. And I arranged this sort of a
matchmaker thing. I was saying, well, who would you like to get married to? And
Cherryh didn't mind Spinrad, and Spinrad didn't mind Cherryh. And I ran those
stories. And a heck of a lot of people believe those stories. I understand that
various writers were calling other writers out and reading the issues over the
phone and stuff. And people who knew Spinrad knew he was planning to move out of
New York. If you slide down, you're going to move to Oklahoma, not Los Angeles.
And if it's set in sight, people believe it. Porter promised there will be a
special treat to appear in the April of 1984 issue of Science Fiction Chronicle.
For next April, I have two ideas I'm going to use. And this one was kind of
funny and humorous, like the thing with the New England Science Fiction
Association buying a shirt in Boston.
And I have two ideas I'm going to use. And one is going to be either, I won't
tell you what they are, the specific ideas, but one will either be kind of
interesting and humorous, or the other might be horrifying, and I think will
scare the hell out of a lot of people. And it won't be humorous, but it's going
to be possible. It's going to be a possible story, but it's going to scare a lot
of people, and I think it might anger a lot of people, too. But it'll be
interesting. It'll be a hope. More with Andrew Porter on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Vernon and Daryl Lane.
There are several professional science fiction magazines still in operation.
Amazing Stories, Analog, Azimuth Science Fiction, and Fantasy and Science Fiction are the present day survivors.
Scores of professional magazines have come and gone over the past 60 years.
There's a niche in science fiction though, which is filled by a handful of magazines published sporadically.
Like the professional monthly magazine, these semi-prozines, combined stories, articles, and interviews.
One such magazine is Starship, subtitled The Magazine About Science Fiction.
We talked recently with Starship's publisher, Andrew Porter of Algol Press, who also produces a news magazine, Science Fiction Chronicles.
Porter told us that running such a magazine is certainly affected by the state of the economy.
Starship went from a regular in 1972, went to twice a year, and then in 1974, I think, went to three times a year.
In 1977-78, it went to quarterly.
And then when the recession hit, I considered the whole, these last quote, two, one quote,
recessions we've had, and one big recession.
And then what happened to Starship happened across the field, or just across publishing period,
within the period of an issue or so, bookstore sales dropped by half the people just decided, you know,
it was more important to save their money or buy food or something like that.
And advertising dropped off a lot too.
And the best thing that happened was 1979 had one issue with 40 pages of advertising, with 90-some-out pages.
And that just dropped tremendously during the recession, all of this stuff dried up.
And it reached the point instead of making a small profit, it was making a small loss.
So the more issues I published, the more money it would take. So what was the point?
So basically, in the spending publications for the funding over a year.
In order for Starship to survive, Porter finds that he must constantly seek ways to lower production costs.
Here he tells us of one story.
The weird thing about Starship is, Chronicle, I write most of it, and obviously I'm not paying myself for writing all this stuff.
Starship is all stuff where you have to pay for it, stuff of letters in the editorial.
The printing costs are much higher than chronicles because you've got four-color cover, a chrome coat, the print run at larger, the overall magazine.
Mailing costs are higher because it weighs more.
So what I did the last issue, I went from a four-color cover to a two-color
cover. And I think it looks good. It doesn't look like it. I've seen other
people do two colors and they do well. The artwork is in blue and then the pie
is in black. So I'm using it like that. So not having a four-color cover I saved
about $300 in cost of color separation and another $400 or $500 in the printing.
Porter told us there's still another tactic for saving on the cost of
production. Remember, these strategies allow him to continue producing Starship.
This new issue, I'm not going to have a cover. It's going to be a stealth cover,
but it's going to be the outside form for the printing that's going to be two
colors. So it'll have an effective two-color cover. But not having that cover
and just printing it sort of on the run. Actually, what I might do is I run the
outside form on slick paper. So it'll be like eight pages of slick paper in the
front, eight pages in the back, and then uncoated the rest of it. And that'll
save, with the cost of having a chrome coat cover and stuff, that'll save $900.
And how many copies you have to sell to make back that $900. So, and also, it's
gone twice a year now. And, um, so it's basically the difference between doing
something that'll make a small profit and something that'll lose. And you can't
publish something that's going to lose money.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Ardath Mayhar hit the fantasy scene in 1979
with several novels. Since Mayhar has a self-admitted penchant for using at
least one unpronounceable word in each title, will let her tell you what she's
written in the fantasy and science fiction genres? In 1979, Doubleday published
How the Gods Wove in Kyranon. In '80, Doubleday brought out The Seekers of
Shar-Nuhn. In '81, '81 brought Soul-Singer of Tyrnos from Athenium. '82 busted
loose like a pot of popcorn. Warlock's Gift came from Doubleday in the spring.
Paperback reprints from Ace of How the Gods Wove in Kyranon of Shar-Nuhn came out
that spring.
Runes of the Lyre came out from Athenium that fall.
And Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey came out. That's all. So it sort of just
grabbed you up like a tornado and carried you away spinning. We asked Mayhar
what type of fantasy she writes. It is really more towards heroic fantasy.
Though not in the sword and sorcery type of thing. These are more people who are
heroic, not through physical strength or anything like that, but because of the
press of circumstance and integrity. I try to write about the way people can be
and often are. Real urban is fine. I mean, there's a place for that. But I have
never seen that the cause of human enlightenment has been forwarded too much by
depicting the absolute worst aspects of human nature. People can be noble. They
can be courageous. And they very often are, so why not write about it? Since she
is a poet as well, we asked Mayhar if writing poetry helps her write prose. I
talk to a lot of college classes, and I belong to a group that has beginners in
it. And I tell them, write poetry even if it's bad poetry, because in poetry you
don't have a novel's worth of elbow room. You can't use 25 wrong words to get
across an idea that two perfect words will give with punch, you know, with real
impact.
Poetry takes the laziness out of it. It makes you search for the proper words,
the proper phrases, exact construction. It conveys what you want to give. Mayhar
published her first novel after her children have come. We asked her if she ever
wishes she had gotten published earlier. You know, I have given that a lot of
thought. It's a very rough road to hold. But I have come to the conclusion that
people who have a great deal of success, they're young, quite often don't keep
pushing themselves to refine their technique, get better and better and better,
so that, by golly, you are so good they can't turn you down. Besides which, you
know, when you live 40 years, you know a lot of things you didn't know when you
lived 25 years. You understand not only what people do, but how they feel under
different circumstances. When a husband comes home and he's lost his job, you
not only know how he acts, you know how he and his wife feel about it. And this
is something that I think causes a great deal of modern non-genre fiction to be
superficial. People are writing about it who have never stood in those shoes and
who don't really understand what it does to your gut to have a child get deathly
ill at 2 o'clock in the morning. You know, all this sort of thing. We'll have
more with Ardath Mayhar on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Ardath Mayhar is an East Texas writer who
recently began publishing in a variety of genres. She has written several
fantasy novels and one science fiction novel, that being a continuation of the
Fuzzy series started by the late H. Beam Piper. Mayhar's contribution to that
series is entitled Golden Dream: a Fuzzy Odyssey. Mayhar has written some
westerns and she's working in other genres. She manages to write a lot because
she works so rapidly. This is amazing because she lives on a farm and she has a
lot of chores to do each day. We asked Mayhar to describe a typical day. My
husband and I get up at six. He has to go to town and open up his service day.
So I get up and fix breakfast for him at six. And at 8.15 comes the postman. So
I'm standing there. I'm washing dishes or I'm out there milking the cow and I'm
listening for the postman. You know when Snoopy is a vulture, when he's on top
of his doghouse being a vulture, that's the way I am with the postman.
I milked one of the cows and turned the five calves in on her and her partner
and then feed the goats and feed the cats and feed the dogs. Then I get the mail
and look through. And I get this interesting mail. A lot of days I begin my real
work. Of course, in among this, I usually try to sweep the porch and straighten
the stacks. I've discovered you don't have to clean your living room if you keep
your stacks straight. So I straighten the stacks. Then I hit the typewriter
about nine o'clock usually. And I may answer six letters before I start writing.
But then I will usually write, depending on what I am engaged in, from three to
seven hours. I can write a pretty fair-sized short story in two and a half,
three hours. But if I'm working on a book and it's really hot, well, I'll go
right on to it until 3:30 or 4 o'clock sometimes. And I'm one of these lucky
people. I don't have to eat. I don't need to eat. So I don't get hungry. I don't
have to interrupt myself. And about 3:30 or 4, though, the goat starts yelling
out the pen. I don't know why she yells at 4 o'clock. But she usually does. And
that wakes me up. And I think, you know, I don't know whether I can get my old
bones up from here or not. I'd better try and see, you know. Among much creaking
and groaning, I point myself off the stool and straighten out and uncrink the
back. And so that's then when I go out and, oh, I may dig in my garden or take a
walk up our little road. It's time to get back. It's time to lick the cat all
over again and milk the cows and put the calves on and feed the goats and all
that good stuff. And then it's time to go supper for Papa. And he gets home
about 6.30. And so we're pretty well ready to pack it in.
So Mayhar's farm chores take up a great deal of her day. We wondered if she
might be more productive if she were to live in the city. I am a peasant to my
toenate. I am not happy. I have lived in town periodically and have been
miserable every minute. Oh, I had to live in Houston for 16 months. I thought
I'd die. In fact, I think I would have died if we hadn't left. We've always had
a little plot of ground. Maybe not for two acres, but something. We've always
had some kind of livestock. When spring comes, if I can't get my hands in the
dirt and make a garden, you just better buy a straight jacket and call the men
in the white coats because I'm ready to go off. I do my best writing, thinking
in the garden. Or even milking the cow. You know, the old head just keeps
rolling right along.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.